General notes:

The relationship between w_a and w_p is:

w_p = w_a * (1 - a)/(a_p - a)




---

** astro-ph/06059591 **

The Dark Energy Task Force (DETF) basically laid out the case for pursuing
dark energy. They proposed several things.

First, they proposed (or probably adopted?) a parametrization of a
time-varying w as

w = w_0 + (1-a)w_a

Which has the virtue that w=w_0 today - is simply a first order Taylor
expansion.

Of course we don't directly measure Lambda. What has actually been measured is
more subtle. We actually measure is a''(t) > 0. According to the Friedmann
acceleration equation,

a''(t) = -4piG/3 * (rho + 3*p) + lambda/3    (p. 27)

Now, the DETF point out that a''(t) > 0 could be explained by:

1.) dark energy - i.e. some component where w < -1/3
2.) cosmological constant
3.) modification to GR, standard cosmological model, etc.

However, I think a better (and probably more widespread) usage is that 1.) and
2.) are both dark energy, and 2.) is just a special case of 1.) (w=-1). This
does bring up a potentially important point which is that the observational
problem is not that we observe dark energy, but that we observe an
acceleration _for which an additional fluid component is one possible
explanation_.

---

** 1209.0922 **

Gives an overview of the theoretical and observational aspects of
dark energy research. The problem of the dark sector is introduced as
introducing

"two additional components in our Universe: a component behaves like cold
particles dubbed cold dark matter, and a component without significant
dynamics dubbed dark energy."

The authors later state,

"Data suggests that dark energy, an energy component probably coming from the
cosmological constant, dominates the current Universe. The percentage of dark
energy density is around 70% â€“ not small nor too large. The Universe is now
accelerating due to the presence of dark energy."

But like I said earlier, the data suggests _acceleration_ for which dark
energy is one possible solution.

The authors then go on to enumerate some of the more popular theoretical
explanations for dark energy. A lot of this touches on field theory I'm rusty
on, and so little qualifies for something I fully understand. Note that there
are actually two theoretical problems associated with dark energy - (1) how to
cancel the gigantic value predicted from the ZPE of quantum fields and (2) how
to generate a teeny eny bit of dark energy:

A.) Some symmetry arguments from field theory, which the authors don't paint
as very convincing

B.) Anthropic principle (don't tell Matthew Buckley)

C.) Fine tuning - introducing a field that cancels the big boi value from
field theory

D.) Modified gravity - wouldn't that be awesome

E.) Quantum cosmology - could lambda and quantum gravity be connected somehow?
From a heuristic point of view this seems pretty compelling, but from a
theoretical perspective probably a rabbit hole atm

F.) Holographic principle - ??? We live in a black hole?

G.) Back-reaction - dark energy arising from some complications regarding the
fact that the Einstein field equations are non-linear. We assume the universe
is homog. and isot., but this isn't true on small scales. We first average
over small scales then time evolve. This introduces a correction term which
might explain DE - but uncertain if the effect could be large enough. Also -
what if the universe is not homogoneous on scales _larger_ than the observable
universe. Then we should have a similar effect!

H.) Phenomological models - ahh, sweet conservative methods. What if it's just
another boring field? An interesting consequence of such a model is that it's
quite easily constructed that w > -1 and w < -1. For the former, quintessence
always has w < -1 and for the latter phantom DE (quintessence with a flipped
sign on the kinetic term) has w < -1. The authors mention that in this case
one should also consider "perturbations" of the dark energy field as it has
"local degrees of freedom." Potentially a way to distinguish between this and
a cosmological constant.

The authors then move on to the more pedestrian concern of observational
probes of dark energy.

The first class of observational probes involves measuring the luminosity
distance or angular diameter distance. By measuring the luminosity distance,
you are measuring the integrated Hubble constant, since

d_L = \int_0^z dz'/H(z')

And the angular diameter distance is related by a factor of (1+z)^-2. So,
there are a few ways of doing this:

1.) SNIa - standard candles, give relatively direct measure of d_L. There are
several issues with systematic errors - SNIa identification, host galaxy dust
extinction, not _really_ standard candles, etc.

2.) CMB - can measure the "shift parameter" and the angular acoustic scale,
which give somewhat direct measurement of the angular diameter distance. Can
also measure the ISW effect, which probes the gravitational potential - has
been measured in cross-correlation with LSS at high signifigance.

3.) BAO - praise Eisenstein

4.) Weak lensing - something about the effect of DE on late-time structure
growth, has been used to constrain w.

5.) some other observational probes including galaxy clusters, GRBs, X-ray
observations, Hubble constant measurements, cosmic age test, and growth factor
data.

The authors then discuss different surveys, constraints on different
theoretical models, and model-independent methods in dark energy - which
doesn't seem super relevant to our work.

